[SOFT INSTRUMENTAL MUSIC]
>> I feel like I'm working
and fighting every single day,
and I'm viewed as
a complete bum.
But that is my problem.
I cannot tell anyone
what is going on with me.
People see me act
quiet, and that's it.
But what is happening in
that quiet is completely--
it's just chaos.
I experience screaming voices.
I go into almost a
paralysis from fear--
just being absolutely
exhausted, and frustrated,
and just tired of--
tired of everything--
and just not
wanting to fight
every single day.
People don't believe
how insane I am.
Fuck!
>> At first, still has human
rights issues that took me
to tribal and indigenous
cultures around the world.
As a photographer,
I wanted to bring
viewers face to face with the
people who were struggling
to hold on to their
unique way of life
and their traditional beliefs.
I became fascinated with
the remaining cultures that
commune with the spirits of
rivers, mountains, animals,
and their ancestors.
While I was working in Northern
Kenya, I met [INAUDIBLE]..
She was a 37-year-old
mother of five.
When she was 13, she started
hearing voices and having
visions, said she was
feeling terrified.
But her grandmother took
her aside and told her
she had a very
special sensitivity,
and then helped guide
her through her crisis.
Today, she's a highly
respected healer and predictor
in her Samburu tribe.
Over the years, I've met
many people like [INAUDIBLE],,
who could be labeled as crazy
in our culture but were seen
as gifted in their own--
people who transform their
mental and emotional crises
to become healers or visionaries
for their communities.
In the West, we often
call them Shaman.
And I began to
wonder, could there
be something more to these
experiences we call crazy?
When I was back home in Seattle,
I met a young man named Adam.
>> I was 20.
It was four days after my
20th birthday I went nuts.
Very compassionate-- be
it animals, be it people--
at a very early age.
He was just really a happy baby.
>> Absolutely amazing.
He's the funniest guy
you would ever know.
I don't know if you've seen
that-- but hysterical-- totally
gifted athletically.
He rode a two-wheel bike at two.
At five, he got into karate.
>> He ended up as one of the
youngest kids to ever get his
black belt. I think he
got that when he was 11.
>> So in high school when I
met Adam, I was 15; he was 16.
He had a cool, red Jeep
Wrangler, and he wakeboarded--
and just really popular,
outgoing, charismatic guy--
lots of friends.
And he was always kind
of challenging the status
quo so to speak.
>> He just knew what
I was thinking a lot.
I could be thinking of
something completely random,
and he wouldn't
know it and tell me.
And I mean, it
would weird me out.
And I've heard that
from multiple people,
too-- other friends of his.
>> I moved to Florida to pursue
professional wakeboarding.
And in that period
is when I experienced
that first depression.
>> July 22nd, 2004--
that was the date.
He started telling us a math
equation that would solve
all the family's problems.
And it wasn't a very simple
one, but it made more sense
to him, which, of
course, to nobody else.
>> When it first occurred,
it was very fun and exciting.
It was just this
total shattering,
and my mind just opened,
and I started thinking
of all these different things.
And in that sense,
it was beautiful.
I found it was the
first time I'd ever
experienced a real
connection to the universe--
where I really felt
like a part of this--
that I was this; this was me.
It was just like incredible.
Then I kept going.
And then I went way too far.
And then it got scary.
>> And it was terrifying--
totally manic or
totally depressed.
>> The rage that will occur in
a manic episode is so scary.
>> You know, it's not who we
knew as happy Adam, funny Adam.
And then you had this
Adam like [SNAP] that.
>> I was surprised to learn
how many people in the US will
suffer from a psychological
crisis in their lifetime.
And like many of
the shaman I met,
the crisis happens
mostly in their youth.
I met a young woman
in New York named
Ekhaya, who also had one of
these episodes in her 20s.
>> I didn't know what
was happening to me.
I felt like my
whole world was just
exploding like I was going
into a whole different reality
that I knew nothing about.
I was very afraid to
walk down the street
because I thought people
were all focused on me
and judging me, and I
thought everybody knew.
I had voices that would
tell me to cut myself.
It was like the voices were
taking control over me.
The visions were
I was very sensitive
to music, to sounds.
I started to have very clear
visions of dead people--
like just appearing
and watching me.
So I felt like I had eyes
watching me all the time.
I started to see
my deceased father,
and he would show up in my room.
And really, it was
the scariest thing
that I've ever experienced.
I literally locked myself
in a room for months.
I took the light bulb
of a light fixture,
and I became
completely enclosed.
>> There was about a three-day
period of in my room,
writing equations and
finding God in my notebook.
And then finally, my parents
were like, whatcha doing?
And then I checked myself
into a mental institution.
That is not the
place to get sane.
They put me in
this holding room.
And there was no door, and there
was a camera on the ceiling.
And I was just
laying on this bed,
and this little girl
walked into my room
and she was just
staring at me, just
with this blank, bizarre stare.
And I kept asking her to
leave, and she wouldn't.
And there was more
crazy people everywhere,
and they were able to
just come into my room.
I immediately felt
in danger and scared.
And so I just
decided, no, and we
went back to my parents'
house and just kind of tried
to figure out what to do.
They put me on
Depakote, and then
that just started the whole
process of, oh, no, now he's
crying all day.
Let's feed him this one.
Oh, no, now he's
barfing all day.
Feed him this one.
>> And we went from one doctor
to another doctor and one
prescription to
another prescription.
>> He was on every medication,
I think, made for bipolar.
>> And they always say, well,
every brain is different.
Sorry if this makes
you crap your pants.
Maybe it'll work.
Maybe it'll make
you kill yourself.
I mean, the disclaimer
on these pills--
that's typically the
first side effect--
is suicidal thoughts.
And that's what the doctor's
giving you to feel better.
I mean, it's--
[LAUGHS] it's crazy.
>> Hearing of the struggles Adam
and Ekhaya were going through
made me want to learn more.
So I started
interviewing experts
in the field of mental health.
>> In the United States, we've
come to believe in the chemical
imbalance theory of
mental disorders.
So we believe that you
have some known deficiency
with the neurotransmitter,
and the drugs fix that,
like insulin for diabetes.
It was a valid
hypothesis that arose out
of our understanding of how
the drugs acted on the brain,
and then it was investigated
and found out basically not
to be so.
I believed it.
When I was a reporter,
I wrote about it.
Our depression is
due to low serotonin.
Schizophrenia is due
to too much dopamine.
And I called up
some top researchers
and I said, I just want
to see the research that
says you found that
people with schizophrenia
had too much
dopamine or you found
that people with depression
had too little serotonin.
And I'll never
forget the answer.
The answer was, well,
we never found that.
I said, what do you mean
you never found that?
Oh, it's just a metaphor,
but it's not really true.
Well, no, not really.
And I was stunned by that.
>> I am very much against
the casual and careless use
of medication that characterizes
American society today.
These medicines are very,
very powerful in helping,
but they can be very
powerful in harming.
Often the withdrawn
problems will be worse
than the original condition.
>> I can look at any clinic I've
worked at, and if they've been
in the clinic for
15 or 20 years,
they've been on every
category of antipsychotic
in the process.
And the truth is that they
still have the same symptoms.
They still have the
same side effects.
They still are operating
at the same level.
They may have been hospitalized
five, six, 10 times
during that process.
>> We've been primed to believe
that, with medical research,
we can find the causes of things
and that we can create these
magic bullets that
fix these problems.
So it fit into that larger
story of medical progress
that we believe in.
We've been embracing
this paradigm of care
now for almost 30
years, and we've
seen the burden go
up, and up, and up.
And if you have an
effective medical treatment
for a disease, at the very
least, that burden of disease
should hopefully stay
stable or even go down.
And we're seeing
exactly the opposite.
>> I didn't know why I was here.
I had no purpose.
I didn't think I had
any reason to breathe.
And I didn't feel deserving
of love, of anything.
The first suicide attempt was,
I took a whole bottle of pills.
The second attempt
was me walking out
of the house headed into
a busy street traffic.
I just wanted a car to hit me,
or a truck, or just something
to take me out,
because this time
I wanted it to really work.
I always felt like
I was the problem.
And if I could get
rid of the problem,
everyone else would be OK.
I decided to try to
get some kind of help.
And I was in the hospital
for about six weeks.
I was put on several different
medications-- heavy drugs,
anti-psychotics, and it really
changed who I was completely.
I gained 70 pounds in the
first 2 and 1/2 months.
I just felt drugged up.
>> I felt like a lab rat, and
the side effects were just
awful, absolutely awful--
vomiting all day--
I couldn't leave my house
for so long from just
like these awful
anxiety attacks.
And the thought of
interacting with people
would make me sick
to my stomach.
>> I was the only one
who he could be around.
>> She basically terminated
her job and made it a full-time
responsibility to
take care of him.
>> It took five or six years
to get him where he could go
to work.
>> You go through the
whole gauntlet from,
was I a good father?
Did I cause this?
Did we do something as parents?
And the pain that you
see him going through
and the inability to
do anything to help it
are the toughest things.
>> I had no idea who I was.
I lost myself, my identity,
my friends, my family.
I lost everything.
[CHIME]
>> After four years of
horrible side effects,
Adam quit all his meds at
once, which I've learned is
a dangerous thing to do.
And then he did a 10-day
silent meditation retreat.
>> I went there a drug-addict
alcoholic that hated everyone
and came back a sober,
life-loving vegan,
complete health nut--
like, no one knew who I was.
>> There was an obvious, major
change in his serenity and his
peace of mind.
>> [SINGING] I'm a simple man.
>> He quit everything.
He was a smoker, a drinker,
pot smoking, and the meds--
and he went to that
10-day meditation--
cold turkey on everything.
I can't believe he did that.
>> Looking back at it, now I
really wish that I would have
known these things and
tried the homeopathic,
meditative approach first,
but it was just kind of like
a panic, I don't know--
put some medication in this
kid and just hope for the best.
>> While doing a human
rights story on Tibet,
I had the rare opportunity
to witness a young monk,
known as a kuten, go into trance
and channel the state oracle
of Tibet.
The ceremony took place in a
monastery near the Dalai Lama's
residence.
Shortly after they seated
him, his eyes rolled back,
and he began speaking
in a high-pitched voice.
Suddenly, he collapsed.
And as they carried
him out of the room,
I was left wondering
what happened.
Two days later, I was invited
to interview the kuten.
His name was Thupten.
He was 30 years old at the time.
He said he began having intense
dreams, severe mood swings,
hearing voices, and
thought he might be dying.
The older monks recognized
he had the potential
to become a kuten.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> We're so locked into our
mind in the rational world,
in the scientific world, that
when we have the spiritual
experience, it can literally
blow somebody's mind,
and they don't know
what to do with it.
And what's needed instead of
stigmatizing people and giving
them labels is to
give people tools
to learn how to ground and
to work with these expanded
states of consciousness.
>> For some people, they can
be an opening to a deeper
self-understanding, to deeper
psychological knowledge,
or to spiritual realms.
>> According to the research,
the best place to be
a schizophrenic in the world is
not North America with all its
pharmacopeia.
It's actually a village
in Africa or India
where there's
acceptance, where people
make room for your
differentness,
where connection is not
broken but is maintained,
where you're not
excluded and ostracized
but where you're
welcomed, and where
there's room for you to act out
whatever you need to act out--
or to express whatever
you need to express.
And the whole community
might even sing with you,
or chant with you,
or hold ceremony.
Meaning-- find some meaning in
your quote unquote "craziness."
>> As our film progressed, we
began hearing from people who
identified themselves
as survivors--
meaning survivors of our
mental health care system.
Many had come out from the
shadows of their diagnosis
and labels by meeting
each other online
to share their experiences
and to form support groups.
Will Hall is on the forefront
of what is called the recovery
movement.
>> When I first
was hospitalized,
I was feeling so desperate
that I wanted to die.
I wanted to kill myself.
And I was hearing very,
very aggressive voices,
and I ended up walking to
the Golden Gate Bridge.
And I remember dragging my arm
against the chain-link fence,
and my fingers were bloody.
And when I got to the
bridge and I looked down,
I really felt like I
needed to end my life.
I felt like I was
this complete failure.
So I was in really
bad, bad shape.
And the mental health
system only made that worse.
I went to the clinic
in San Francisco.
My therapist had recommended
that maybe I should
try different medications.
And I was buzzed
into the clinic.
And I didn't know
what was coming,
but the door locked behind me.
It was like there was this wild
animal that they had captured,
and they were evaluating it.
And I was put in restraints,
and I was not resisting,
or arguing, or being hostile.
Finally, after doing
all these tests,
the resident psychiatrists
who had been working with me
came in and sat down.
They said, OK, Mr. Hall, we
have your results of this test.
We have your diagnosis.
It was this very solemn,
ceremonial moment.
And they said, you have
a severe mental illness.
You have a kind of
schizophrenia called
schizoaffective disorder.
It combines the criteria
for schizophrenia
with the criteria
for bipolar disorder.
So it's kind of like
this catchall diagnosis.
It's sort of like
winning the lottery
of severe mental illness.
And they said, there's no cure.
There's no cure for this.
You will be maintaining
yourself on medication
to manage your symptoms.
We really recommend that you
rethink some of your goals
in your life.
That moment was really
like casting a spell on me.
And they were in the
process of transforming me
from an ordinary,
full human being
into the second-class citizen
of being a mental patient.
>> I interviewed a group of
people that had been diagnosed
for their mental emotional
distress and asked each
of them, what was
your diagnosis.
>> Schizophrenia, schizotypal,
schizoid personality,
schizoaffective, bipolar
I and bipolar II.
>> ADD, dysthymia,
depression, and PTSD.
>> Borderline personality,
they put autism,
they put Asperger's, they
put manic depressive--
I didn't think I was that.
>> Manic depression,
bipolar, bipolar I,
and just one time
schizoaffective.
>> In the era of the DSM-3,
there were like 12 personality
disorders, and I
had eight of them.
And the perfectionist in me
wanted to try and get all 12.
>> I learned that all these
diagnoses come from a book
called The DSM, the Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual
of Mental Disorders published
by the American Psychiatric
Association.
Over the years, the
number of disorders
has increased dramatically
with each new addition.
>> The problem with the DSM-5
is it took a number of normal
aspects of life and
pathologized them--
normal grief because
major depressive disorder.
Overeating becomes
binge eating disorder.
Temper tantrums become
disruptive mood dysregulation
disorder.
It's taking the experiences
of everyday life
that are unavoidable, part
of the human condition,
turning them into
medical disorders.
>> The Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual is basically
a sophisticated way of
not listening to people.
You interview just so that
you've heard certain keywords,
you fit it into your
framework, and then
you've got a whole
algorithm of treatments
that you offer
people so that when
your colleagues and your
supervisors ask you,
what are you doing
to this person?
You're following the protocol.
>> If we used all
these psychiatric tests
on the healthy population, I
doubt that anyone would avoid
to get at least one diagnosis.
We think that there are people
who are normal over here,
and then there's the
pathological ones who
have depression, or anxiety,
or addiction, or schizophrenia,
bipolar disorder, ADHD, or any
number of other conditions.
What I see is a continuum.
These traits, to one
degree or another,
are present in almost everybody.
And it's a mythology to
think that there's the normal
and then there's the abnormal.
>> Three months
into our filming,
Adam asked to be interviewed.
He had just started his fourth
10day meditation retreat,
and painful childhood
memories began coming up.
When he went to
the retreat leaders
and revealed his
mental health history,
they decided it was
best for him to leave.
>> The first time I went
to the Vipassana center,
I had a memory of when I was
really young and just being
in a bathroom.
It was involving a relative.
I'm just like dancing around.
I was molested as a child, and
it was involving a relative.
Once I realized my
grandfather had molested me,
I went to speak to my parents,
and they didn't believe me.
I'm losing my house.
I'm losing my job.
And I just walked away
from all my bills,
just looking into the abyss.
And that's when
I began believing
that my mother molested
me, my father molested me.
My mind just, I think--
it couldn't handle it anymore.
>> So if I have an
unusual way of feeling,
and my emotions are really
big, and having a hard time,
and the culture and my
family doesn't support that,
I can go off into a really
isolated way and become very,
very disturbed-- alienated,
isolated, more chaotic,
more rigid, and you
give me a label.
And then we look
at someone whose
"mind--" that is their feelings,
their thoughts, their behavior
is off--
and then we say, oh,
they have a bad brain.
And then either you isolate them
because you're afraid of them
or you give them pills
or whatever you do.
And medication is
sometimes essential.
But if you don't first start
with communities of support,
then of course
the brain is going
to stop functioning so
well, because the brain is
a social organ.
Relationships are just as
important as brain processes,
and I feel very
deeply that if we
could make that
clear to everyone,
we could have a shift
in how we actually
take care of each other.
>> This is myself and
my best friend Mia.
And she was a huge part
of my life-- someone
that I could trust.
And we lived together.
We moved to New York together.
>> We wrote together.
We sung together.
We managed an art
gallery together.
We created a business together.
So we were very much a
part of each other's lives.
>> During one of
my lowest points,
she didn't quite understand
what was happening.
>> When I look at her, this
is not the person that I had
originally met.
And then she was on medication
when she was in that hospital.
And it was changing her.
By my analysis-- and I
may be clearly wrong--
but I felt like she was
being very manipulative.
There was a day where she
got out of the hospital,
and I met her.
And I gave her money for
travel, and I put her in a cab.
I took her to lunch,
and she was supposed
to go to kind of
like a group home.
And she attempted suicide again.
I couldn't be a crutch
for her anymore.
And for a year, I
didn't speak to her.
And that was one of
the hardest things
I've ever done as a friend.
I think it broke her heart, too.
>> I called her, and I was
experiencing some issues
and really depressed.
And I was like,
you know, I don't
feel like I can live anymore.
And she told me to
get over myself.
And I just want to
say, I mean, we've
reconciled our relationship,
and she's back in my life,
and we've talked about this
and healed over these things.
But that is the worst thing
that you could say to someone.
Another friend of
mine understood
what I was going through.
>> I remember actually
talking to her on the phone,
and talking to her in person,
and smiling a lot with her
and saying, this
is not a breakdown.
This is a breakthrough!
It's kind of like, literally
breaking down a wall
and going through another
path to be that person you're
going to be and being willing
to accept that people are going
to reject you on some level--
your own family, your friends.
And again, I
connected with that.
I myself had attempted suicide
probably four or five times
in my lifetime.
And it took me some
time to figure out
that that feeling
inside was about not
wanting to be here the
way that I was here,
not not wanting to be here.
>> We don't have enough people
in our lives to look at it
differently from a peer
perspective and say,
you know what?
I've been through this.
I know where you are.
I've actually
experienced myself.
Someone that hasn't
experienced it,
it's very, very hard for
them to see through it.
>> [SINGING]
Sometimes the music--
she's just like a lover.
She'll try to lead you astray.
>> I've been living in
my car for three months--
or a little over three.
I have incredible
people in my life.
And right as I lost my family,
I found a brand new one
that is incredible.
This place, SoulFood
family, they are amazing.
It is just a beautiful community
of open-minded, loving people.
>> I think a lot of people
would say that Adam was broken,
and I don't view it that way.
I think our culture
is broken, not Adam.
We say there's
something wrong with you
instead of actually addressing
the fact that, as a society,
we don't have the skills to
be able to support somebody
like that.
>> [SINGING] --to wonder what
the mantis really wanted when
she ate her lover after
sex in the garden.
Do you think she
missed him at all?
Oh, did she miss him at all?
>> He seems to just tune right
into what people are feeling.
I don't think he knows how
not to feel it for them.
I think he'd be a great
psychologist maybe someday
or work with kids,
and he doesn't need
to end up in the back of a car.
>> [SINGING] Guess
I'll never know.
>> Being here and finding
that love, and comfort,
and just the
acceptance saved me.
Without that, with just being
in your head, having nothing
other than rejection to what
you're experiencing going on
is absolutely maddening.
>> One of the problems in this
industrial society is that
the so-called normal people--
they don't want to admit that
they're psychotic, actually.
We live in a psychotic society.
I'm sorry.
We do.
And what is meant by psychotic?
Out of touch with reality.
>> When somebody who's
in this delicate state--
you know, they're in a process.
They're sent to prison,
they're sent to jail,
they're sent to a
psychiatric ward,
or they're chemically
incarcerated,
or they're homeless.
>> I'm not against medications.
I'm not against hospitals.
I'm not against doctors.
I know many people who are
benefited by medications.
But we have a one-size-fits
all framework.
We think that the
issue is biological;
the solution is medical
and pharmaceutical;
and we see it as
objective science.
It's not objective science.
>> Most non-Western cultures,
it's assumed that if people
hear voices or they have
very unusual beliefs,
there's meaning to
those experiences.
Only in the Western world have
developed this bizarre idea
that hearing voices and
having strange ideas
has no meaning at all.
It's just a symptom of
these imagined illnesses
that biological psychiatry
is actually created.
>> While mentoring young
photographers on the Navajo
nation, I met Morgan
[? Yazzie ? ].
He said he had been
having dizzy spells
and hallucinations in his
20s but tried to ignore them.
They started to happen more
frequently until he finally
had what he called a stroke.
His friend, Sam
[INAUDIBLE],, a medicine man,
did a ceremony for him and
told Morgan he was ignoring
a calling--
a calling to be a medicine man.
And I've heard this
several times before.
If you ignore the
calling, there's
a good chance that you could
get sick and possibly die.
Many say it's a transformation
waiting to happen
that has to be dealt with.
>> I couldn't go into
the bathroom to shower
because people
were smoking crack.
I felt like I was about
to harm myself again,
and I didn't want that.
And so I called the nurse's
station, and one of the nurses
said, come back.
Come back and we'll help you.
I had an intake with
the psychiatrist
at the emergency room.
And after him questioning
me, and seeing my records,
and seeing that I had
been in the hospital
for already six weeks,
he didn't believe me.
He said, I'm going
to send you home--
that you don't need to be here.
I walked out of the
emergency room door.
I had just filled a prescription
bottle of antipsychotic pills.
And right outside
of the hospital,
I took all the
pills in the bottle.
When I woke up, I was
strapped to a bed.
When I opened my eyes, I was
just like, how am I here?
[STIFLING TEARS]
Why am I still here?
I couldn't believe it.
But I am very, very
grateful for that moment,
because that's the
moment I knew that there
was a purpose for my life.
There was a reason.
I didn't know it,
but I knew that there
was some higher being,
some higher force, that
wanted me to be alive.
And I knew that
I had to find it.
>> [SINGING] Born and
raised in the city of rain
and life's raining.
It's pouring.
It's not letting up.
I'm soaked at the core, but I--
>> Ever since I can
remember with Adam--
meeting him when I
was in high school--
is his confidence that was
what made him very popular.
And people loved
to have him around
because he was free to be him.
>> [SINGING] Thank
you to the sunshine.
Thank you to the rain.
Thank you for the good times.
Thank you to the pain.
>> And then I went
into the Army at 18,
and that's when we lost touch.
I just heard it through
friends that something happened
to Adam, and they
said he was crazy,
and they put him in a hospital.
And I didn't really
know what was going on,
but I was worried for him.
>> [SINGING] --to the sunrise.
-to the sand.
>> We started hanging out
more and meditating together.
And at that time, I was
in a very dark place.
And the things that he
told me about meditation,
and the quieting of your mind,
and going to that still place--
because of the experiences
I had at war, I was open.
At this point, a
part of me still
thought of him as unstable--
that, he was-- as the
doctors diagnosed him--
he was using meditation as
a means to cope with that.
>> [SINGING] I say thank
you to the sunshine.
Thank you to the rain.
>> I would be like, well,
he may be crazy or not,
but I'm still his friend, and
I'm going to talk him through
this.
But in that going along
process of feeling
that I was helping him, I
realized that he was actually
helping me.
>> Under shamanic traditions,
you're not ever completely
healed until you become
a healer yourself.
It's a way of the
wounded healer.
And as you heal
yourself, what has
been before a great source
of pain or suffering
now becomes a source
of compassion.
>> And the people who've gone
through psychotic episodes can
come out the other end and
say, that changed my life.
>> Those openings or those
things that we call psychotic
breaks--
I think, why can't it be
seen as a great blessing?
That I open to
something far greater?
That was the holy,
blessed moment
that released either
the angels or the demons
so that I could access the
deeper essence who I really am.
>> The Buddha wouldn't
have been enlightened.
Jesus wouldn't have
been Jesus without going
into the desert for 40 days.
There's a kind of
arc or narrative
that wants to unfold
in the psyche.
And if an individual is
given proper support,
a person can actually
reconstruct their life
at a higher level.
>> I saw a flyer
about Baltic Street.
It said it was
for people who had
experienced emotional struggle
and had mental health issues.
I went there.
I met a beautiful,
beautiful group of people.
And these people were
telling me their story
and asked me what was happening
with me and my experience.
And there I was able to
record in their studio
and get back to songwriting
and making my music.
I did some painting.
I really got in touch
with myself again.
It was like the
first time that I
was able to feel myself through
the cloud of the medication.
Going to their
support groups, I met
a lady who offered
to interview me
for a job that was coming up.
They hired me for the position.
It was part time starting out.
And then about two months later,
they hired me on full time.
>> For people diagnosed
with schizophrenia,
if we take a Western
construct for a second--
the average recovery
rate in the Western world
with all the
sophisticated diagnoses,
and medications, and
highly-paid experts
is about 1/3 The recovery
rate in the developing
world is about 2/3 on average.
I find that kind of interesting.
>> How mental illness is
constructed in different places
in the world is
very, very different.
I believe myself-- if I hadn't
chosen to live in Nepal,
I probably would have been
medicated or institutionalized.
>> I knew for myself that
I couldn't be in a society
or a culture that
was high paced.
I needed to move down slower.
So it was easier for me,
by being an anthropologist,
create a lifestyle
where I could be
out in villages on agricultural
time, not an industrial time.
[BLEATING]
I met a lot of people
that you would maybe
seem crazy by our
concepts of mental health.
And there's something
over there that's
called "crazy wisdom" in
Tibetan medical tradition,
illness is not
just an individual,
it's something larger, and it's
related to the environment.
So when we start to lose that
connection with the environment
in a very deep way, I
think other illnesses
start to manifest.
>> [INAUDIBLE] is known as a
powerful shaman and the leader
of the [INAUDIBLE] tribe
in the Ecuadorian Amazon.
As hunter gatherers, an
intimate connection to nature
is critical to their survival.
>> This is the
root of this tree.
This is somewhat
of a grass that's
growing up the trail here.
And evidently, there's a
fruit of another plant.
In this case, it's for
respiratory problems.
How they came upon this by trial
and error over the centuries,
I guess, is quite amazing.
>> Every five to seven days,
[INAUDIBLE] goes into trance
and takes on the spirit
essence of the jaguar.
>> [GROWLING]
>> It's a process called
shapeshifting that he uses
to guide his people.
At the time, I looked at this
with curiosity and skepticism.
Now, I wonder if
these rituals could
be a metaphor that
helps the tribe connect
to nature in a very
deep and spiritual way.
They're not free of
mental health issues,
and not everyone who has
a crisis becomes a shaman.
But they often believe
that nonordinary states
like hearing voices
or having visions
indicate the person in crisis
has a special sensitivity--
a sensitivity that can actually
be a gift to the community.
Then, they get that person
guidance, meaning, and purpose.
I believe that's something
we can learn from.
[GUITAR PLAYING]
[PHONE RINGING]
>> Hey, Phil.
>> Hey, Adam.
>> I got jumped.
>> Oh no.
>> My jaw is shattered on
both sides and then fractured
in the middle from the rock.
>> Oh my God.
>> It shattered on the
sides from their feet
and their fists.
And then, I guess, my
mom let me know yesterday
that she has cancer.
>> Adam flew back to
Seattle the next day,
and Ron offered to let
him live in his garage.
>> They turned on you--
>> Yeah, yeah, they all just
started hitting me like all
from--
every side of me.
I dropped to the ground and just
shielded myself and told them
that I didn't want
to fight them,
and they continued
to just beat me.
And one of them picked up,
I guess, a rock that was--
I guess to be about
the size of my own head
and just picked it
up over his head
and just spiked it
down on my face.
And it fractured my jaw
in half right here--
just totally all the way to
the teeth, just separated this.
And after they smashed
the rock in my face,
then I guess one of them was
coming at me with a knife
to stab me.
While I was unconscious,
my friend Rico
shielded my body with his own.
We were sitting on
Baby Beach in Lahaina.
We had a fire going.
We weren't supposed
to have a fire going.
It was a magical
place for a minute,
and everyone just
went in the circle
of sharing how
they ended up being
homeless right next to me.
It was amazing to hear how
broken all of these people were
and how broken.
I was.
And that was what
brought us together
and what was making
us all stronger.
And it was just
truly incredible.
These people that had
absolutely nothing
were the people that
were helping me.
[INAUDIBLE EXCHANGE]
[GUITAR PLAYING]
>> The following day
after being assaulted,
my mother called me to tell me
that she had terminal cancer
and was going to pass soon.
And so that was
incredibly devastating.
I can't be there for her.
I wish that I could.
And I want to love her the
best way that I know how,
but without my
family's acceptance,
I have nothing to give them,
because I literally can't.
There is so much about me that
is not accepted in my family.
The majority of what makes
me who I am is not accepted.
Take medication, you're crazy.
That's all they will say to me.
>> Often families would come
and they would have an education
on what the symptoms of
bipolar disorder are,
for example or they would know
the symptoms of schizophrenia.
But they weren't educated
on seeing the strengths
in their relative and
noticing the things
that their relative
is really great at
and pointing those out.
They weren't educated on how
to have hope for recovery.
>> There's sort of a
continuum of involvement.
There's neglect on
one end of a continuum
and then there's overprotect on
the other end of the continuum.
And sometimes families kind
of oscillate between the two.
So they'll be really
protective, overprotective,
overprotective-- no,
you must do this.
You must take your meds.
You must-- all of this idea of
everything the relative needs
to do to stay well.
And then it's big eruption!
So much fighting!
Crisis.
And then they just
swing to neglect.
And it's human nature.
It's frustration.
It's a lot of things.
But then neglect is
like, you know what?
You figure it out!
I'm done!
Get out of my house!
You just figure out the
whole thing yourself.
I'm not doing this anymore.
>> They want to fix
that person they love,
but they don't know how
because, in fact, it's not easy,
and there is no obvious answer.
>> We don't do
this in isolation.
We do this in relationship.
Healing is about
relationship with our psyche
and with each other
with the natural world.
Being socially marginalized
and psychologically vulnerable
is usually characterized in
the West by lots of suffering.
>> This is in kindergarten.
Although I'm
smiling, in my eyes,
I see sadness because this
is around the time when
my father started molesting me.
So it's a bittersweet picture.
I was really confused about
the world, about adults.
There was a time where my
mother dealt with the situation
and took me to the precincts to
speak to the police about what
had happened, but my
father denied everything,
and it was just
swept under the rug.
And my mother let me go back
to him after he molested me.
And she even married him
later in her life again.
So I felt really betrayed.
You know, I was
always wearing a mask.
I was smiling, just
pretending to be happy--
to be what everybody
expected me to be.
>> It begins with the denial of
childhood trauma in our whole
culture, which then shows up
in the medical profession.
>> When I was in the hospital,
I was asked about my family
history of mental illness.
But what I was asked
about was about
the presumed genetic origins.
I was never asked about
the violence, and abuse,
and history of trauma
that I've been through
and that my family
has been through.
>> When I was a
beginning psychiatrist,
there were still
kind of two schools.
There was the uncovering
and the covering.
Covering was used-- just
suppression of symptoms.
The uncovering was
you do something--
some process-- psychotherapeutic
process, depth psychology
and so on, trying
to go to the core--
to the underlying reason.
And now what we
see more and more,
for a variety of reasons--
not the least of
which is the influence
of the pharmaceutical
companies--
you see more and more
shift towards trying
to solve everything with
this suppression of symptoms.
>> What becomes suppressed is
our authenticity, our emotions.
And then we become
25 and 30 or 35, 40--
and we don't know who we are.
And somebody asks
us, what do you feel?
You say, I have no idea.
So then it becomes not our first
nature, but our second nature
to suppress our feelings, to
lose touch with ourselves,
and to suppress
our gut feelings.
And then we pay the cost
later on in the form
of addictions, mental
illness, or any range
of physical illnesses.
>> This photo was a
beautiful, beautiful time.
I had just given birth.
I was married.
And I was just so happy.
I had custody of my children,
and it was a lot of pressure
for me now being single.
And so I became really,
really depressed again.
I started to treat my
children differently.
I've always wanted to be the
best mother that I could be.
So when I found
myself doing things
like yelling and lashing
out, it wasn't right,
and I became depressed.
And I said, I have to leave.
I have to get away, because
they don't deserve this.
>> Living in the car,
I mean, it's nice.
I have my own little
meditation pod.
I think a lot of people would
imagine this to be miserable,
but it's not that bad.
Like this was given to me.
This car was given to me.
It's so hard to
even figure out if I
should complain or celebrate.
I wake up and meditate and try
and get over whatever nightmare
I woke up into.
The voice in my head that
tells me to kill myself,
to kill other people--
it's just chaos.
I walk to town and,
hopefully, sell weed.
It's about three miles
to SoulFood, I guess,
and that helps me ground, and
breathe, and gets my heart up.
Go and try and get what I need
to survive and then come back.
I'm amazed that I am alive--
for how close I was to
jumping off of a balcony.
Three years ago, I was
completely sober, vegan, didn't
smoke, and active.
[INCREDULOUS LAUGH]
I mean, it's--
>> And now how would
you describe yourself?
>> Just a shit show--
like an alcoholic, a drug
addict, a nicotine fiend,
malnourished, and crazy.
>> Adam is not alone.
Many of our homeless are
struggling emotionally.
And it seems our jails have
become our new asylums.
Prison bed can be $50,000
to $100,000 a year.
It's more expensive to
put someone in prison
than Harvard tuition.
It's much less expensive
to provide housing
and to provide
adequate treatment.
The best place to handle
psychiatric problems
is in the community.
And the problem was that
the funding for all this
has just disappeared.
>> This is the one business
where we're supposed to be
spending time with people.
The kingpin is talking, and
understanding, and learning,
and listening.
>> If you talk to patients, for
example, with schizophrenia,
and although they might tell
you many strange things--
that they might think they
are Napoleon or Jesus--
if you show them respect and
talk to them, it has an effect.
They need less medication.
They need less forced treatment.
>> The solution that is offered
by our society is a Band-Aid.
It really isn't a
lasting solution.
During the time we've
been filming Adam,
he was trying to qualify
for any type of housing
through various local
and state agencies.
But up to this point, he
had been unsuccessful.
>> Have you had thoughts
of hurting others?
>> Yes.
>> Yes?
>> Like complete psychotic
rage, where it's like any
frustration, any sense
of violation, anything--
all of a sudden there is,
like just crazy thoughts
of hurting people.
>> Just because there's a
violent image or violent words
doesn't necessarily mean that
the person is actually going
to do something-- that the
behavior is going to result.
That's a conclusion
that we jump to.
>> The truth is that somebody
with schizophrenia is far more
likely to be a victim of
violence than perpetuate it.
>> I have had a serial
killer in my head.
I feel like what
I'm experiencing
is the integration of a
fragmented personality
that I've had my entire life.
It's like I'm waking
up the forgotten me,
and it's the scariest
thing in the world.
I've rarely expressed,
even to myself,
when these thoughts occur.
I suppress them.
>> And this side of you over
here is the happy Adam--
the part that everybody
loves that helps them
with this or that?
>> He lives here.
>> He lives in your heart?
>> Yeah.
>> And then the
shadow's up here.
>> By the time my
heart gets over here,
it says some crazy things.
>> And they scare you?
>> Yeah, I actually forced
myself to listen to it
and write it.
And I would like to read that.
Wake the fuck up, cocksucker.
Wake the fuck up.
I wish you were dead.
I will fucking kill
you and everyone
that you think you know.
This is the place
where evil thrives.
Fucking kill yourself.
You need me.
Your father hates you.
You betrayed me.
I leave you alone for
two fucking minutes
and you get fucked, literally,
you pathetic, incompetent fuck.
How the fuck can I trust you?
I am the only one with
any fucking balls.
Step down, and I will
show you what pain is.
I don't want to read
any more of this.
[SOFT INSTRUMENTAL MUSIC]
>> Adam, had he had the same
experience in an Eastern
culture, where there's
mentors and shamans,
he might have had his experience
formulated in a completely
different way.
He might have been told that
he was gifted with sight
but that that site needs
to be employed and deployed
within a certain tradition
where there's teaching
and there's guidance.
Because it's too much
for the individual
to be able to handle.
No, in the Western
world, there's
no such framework for that.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> I met [INAUDIBLE] in the
very remote Darkhad Valley.
At 70, she had an active
healing practice--
working day and night, seeing
people one after another
during the time I
stayed with her.
[TRIBAL DRUMS]
One night, while
going into a trance
to help a woman who was having
trouble in her pregnancy,
she collapsed.
Then she got up and kept going.
When she was about 12 or 13, she
started having intense dreams,
hearing voices, and feeling
confused and frightened.
She would often
go into the forest
alone and be gone for days.
And her parents were
extremely worried.
Her grandfather,
who was a shaman,
recognized these traits in
her and began mentoring her.
While making [INAUDIBLE]
portrait the next morning
and looking into
her face, I thought
of her devotion to her patients
and how much time and energy
she gave as a healer.
I was reminded how
important our relationships
are to the healing process.
>> Peers are taught to meet
other peers where they're at.
And a lot of time in other
medical or clinical settings,
you have this hierarchy.
But in peer work, it's almost
like talking to a friend.
It's like saying, I've
been through this.
What have you been through?
Share your story with me.
I really, truly
value my life now,
and I have a focus and awareness
that I didn't have before.
>> What we're seeing happen in
the US and internationally is
a grassroots democratization
of mental health.
We have lost touch
in our medical system
from some of the simple
needs that people
have for connection-- the
simple needs that people
have for community.
And because the mental health
system isn't providing it,
people who've been in
the system are starting
to provide it for ourselves.
>> Today's session is about
finding strength after trauma.
As a survivor of
childhood trauma,
as someone who was sexually
abused by a family member,
I can say that I'm a
survivor of trauma,
and I know that I'm not alone.
>> It's very, very important
that we have storytelling from
people who've lived through
psychosis and who've discovered
alternatives to medications
and alternatives to diagnosis
because that's
really the expertise.
>> Your story is important.
You are unique.
Own your title--
trauma survivor.
Find your strength.
>> Come on, [INAUDIBLE]
>> My mother-- now
she's facing death.
Me sharing my spiritual
side with her--
she was open to it.
And it was amazing.
And she really did listen to me.
And it was one of the
first times in so long
that I had been able to
share my heart with someone
in my family.
It's been really
intense on the family.
It's been really intense on me.
I see the death of my
mother being a catalyst
to bring a whole lot of
necessary love and appreciation
into my family.
And that was what she was about.
The first time I was diagnosed
insane I had something to say.
And I've looked back at the
things that I had to say,
and I don't think
any of it's insane.
It's a very damaging
thing to not
be able to trust
your own perspective.
When you can't do that,
that really fucks you up.
>> What we do in the West
is to constrain individuals.
People start to
manage your experience
at a level which takes
your agency away, robs you
of your autonomy, makes you
feel like they don't trust you.
That's not what you want to do.
>> Once I internalized a
mentally ill identity--
once I came to see myself as
having this disease living
inside of me, I stopped
trusting in my intuition,
because it was sick.
The only way to
find myself again
and to get back to an authentic
sense of self is to feel this,
and to listen to it,
and to explore it,
and to not be afraid of it.
So that's what I started to do.
>> I traveled to the Amur
River in Eastern Siberia,
where the word
shaman originated.
There, I met [INAUDIBLE],,
a very respected healer
for over 60 years.
She was forced to practice
in secret for decades
until the Soviet Union
collapsed in 1989
and was just one of
two remaining shaman
in her [INAUDIBLE] culture.
Nine-year-old
Sasha-- [INAUDIBLE]
neighbor in their village.
Her grandmother told us that
Sasha has fainting spells
and hears voices,
both considered
signs of shamanic potential.
Unfortunately, just three
weeks after my visit,
[INAUDIBLE] passed away,
leaving Sasha without a mentor.
At the time, it seemed
I was witnessing
the disappearance of
an age-old tradition
in this corner of Siberia.
However, as I later
discovered, shamanism
is re-emerging in very
unexpected places.
Ekhaya met a South African
shaman, known as a sangoma,
living in Baltimore and
began working with her.
>> She told me that I was
called to be a healer, a shaman.
And I had been feeling
that inside of me.
And a lot of times,
we need confirmation.
And so that was my
absolute-- as soon as she
said that, I was in tears.
Her exact words were, you
should be doing what I'm doing.
You have priesthood
responsibilities.
You should be doing
what I'm doing.
I get on a packed
bus for a four-hour
trip to Baltimore, Maryland,
where my baba is, my teacher.
And during that time, I'm
just really meditating
and just preparing
myself for everything,
because it is a lot
of intense work--
beautiful work but
very intense work.
[CHANTING]
The sangoma training involves
humbling yourself completely
to your teacher and
to your ancestors.
>> What you have to do as
a twaza is submit yourself,
your ego, all of your beliefs.
You have to sit on the floor.
You have to eat with your hands.
You have to surrender
to your ancestors.
>> A twaza is an initiate to
become a traditional South
African healer.
>> During slavery, we
lost a lot of who we were.
But what you can't
take from a person
is what's in their blood.
So if it's in your blood,
it's going to be in you.
The only way that she
received the calling
is because someone in her family
was a traditional South African
healer.
Her ancestors that are in her
blood-- that they're saying,
wake up.
Wake up.
They're waking her up to them
to say, you are our child,
and this is how we
want you to live.
>> At the start
of my initiation,
I experienced all of the
problems that I was having,
all of the anxieties
and depression,
and I was being pushed.
And I hurt, and I cried,
and my body ached.
The medications drown you out.
They mask you.
They put a fog
over your problems,
and you really are in
touch with yourself.
You don't feel things.
I've had to face all my
fears, all the things that
made me upset and angry, all
the people that I've hurt.
I've had to face
it and be with it
before I was able to
release it and let it go.
>> Adam started turning a corner
and moved into an apartment
with a friend.
It had been three
long years since he
was turned away from
the meditation center
and alienated from his family.
>> I had an opportunity for
about a year to be an autistic
counselor, and that was
really powerful for me.
I know music therapy
is a practice
that more and more
people are looking into.
>> Yeah.
>> Maybe I should be
one of those people.
>> Yeah!
>> My mind was just interpreting
everything as hate and rape,
and that's all it
knew at that point.
And that's what became this
evil personality in my head
that has gotten a lot better.
Actually, my dad just called
me before this interview
and was saying he originally
just wanted to be by himself.
And now, he wants
to come hang out.
I think he's coming over here.
We're going to have beers.
Merry Christmas.
That makes me so happy.
That's magic.
Now, he's coming
over to my place.
I have a place for my
dad to come over to.
And he's down.
And he's actually
down to talk to me.
>> That's great.
>> Yeah.
[SPIRITUAL SINGING]
>> Ekhaya has come
a very long way.
When she first came to me,
she was very unstable, all
over the place, not
sure of herself,
confused, and just not
clear about who she was.
>> But like, OK, finally, I
know why I'm on this Earth.
I know why I'm so sensitive to
all these things and energies.
I understand why I
have visions now.
I understand.
And I had to go find it.
You tell your therapist
or your psychiatrist,
and they say you're ill.
They say you have borderline
personality disorder.
You have chronic depression.
And these are the drugs
that you need to take.
This is what's
going to help you.
But nobody told me, this
is a spiritual matter,
and you are gifted.
And now it's time for
you to hone these gifts.
(EMOTIONAL) And it
was just so amazing.
I'm so grateful, because
it has changed my life.
I know who I am
without a doubt, 100%.
I know who I am, and it
is the best feeling ever.
I have a purpose, and I
have a reason to live.
And the reason is
the best reason
that God could ever give--
is to help humanity, help other
people that have experienced
the things that I
have experienced,
to connect with Earth, to
connect with this universe.
It is magical, and
I'm so grateful.
>> It's part of being
human to discover meaning
in our tragedies, to discover
meaning and purpose in the pain
that we go through, and to look
beyond the specific suffering
that we're going through and
fit it into the larger story
of our lives.
That's just human.
If you ask anybody how they
survived an extreme tragedy
in their life, most
people are going
to put spirituality in the
center of what helped them.
There's no difference from
mental health problems.
We have to recognize
that people's
spiritual beliefs, and
their spiritual resources,
and their religion are
often central to give them
the strength to make it through.
>> The paths are many.
Some find it through religion.
Sometimes religion is
an obstacle to that.
In fact, often it is.
But it may be a conduit to
it as well, depending on who,
and how, and where.
There is this spiritual
nature that if we ignore,
we're actually ignoring an
essential part of ourselves.
Human beings have certain
needs for meaning, for contact,
for community, for
acceptance, for authenticity,
which is the capacity
to feel what we feel,
and to be in touch
with our bodies,
and to express what we
feel when we need to.
>> In the shamanic traditions,
there are maps and there are
compasses that you can use to
guide you through your dark
night of the soul.
So you're encouraged to explore
the depths of the psyche
with all of that
despair and suffering
and to not get stuck there--
to use that as some
point of initiation
to open you up to lucidity and
a sense of personal destiny.
>> There is something so
magnificently touching
and moving to see how
people handle trauma.
Because you see the splendor
of the human spirit for those
who don't allow themselves to be
victimized but become stronger
and more committed
to making sure
it doesn't happen
to someone else.
>> What I would like to see is
that everyone who goes through
the kind of crisis that I went
through is given an opportunity
to explore what it might
mean-- to present them with
the possibility that maybe
it's not just a broken brain,
maybe it's not just an
illness, maybe this is not just
something to hide
and be ashamed of.
Maybe it's something to
explore and learn from.
>> The film process has been
a perfect storm of everything
that scares me.
The interactions
with an older male
and also just the experience
of cameras, of invasion,
of allowing--
sharing every aspect of this
has been like a perfect thing
for me to get over trauma, and
really seeing, letting it--
this has been
terrifying in every way,
but it's been also healing.
Phil has helped me so much--
someone coming to me
with an honest curiosity
about my situation
instead of opinion.
I hope that this film
ends up showing people
that they are OK.
>> What helps all
of us stay well?
Well, it's shelter.
It's exercise.
It's good food.
It's meaning in life.
It's socialization.
And that immediately
breeds a sense
of optimism, a sense of hope
that you can have a breakdown
but you can recover from
that with the right sort
of environmental care.
How do we as a society provide
those things to people?
How do we build
up that foundation
and not just put
a Band-Aid over it
but to really build a healthier
society for ourselves?
>> I just think it's really
important for people to find
some spiritual path.
It doesn't have to be shamanism.
It could be yoga;
it could be tai chi;
it could be meditation--
some spiritual path
that opens people up
to their own
creative impulse and
to their own spiritual power.
>> There are millions
of varieties of therapy
and alternative
holistic treatments.
But in the mental health
system, really, all we offer
is traditional psychotherapy
kind of stuff and drugs.
>> Now is the time for us to
be pressing for alternatives,
for new ways of
looking at things,
for funding peer support groups,
for getting options out there,
for bringing the holistic
medicine framework into mental
health care.
Bring them out of
the closet, and that
will help fuel a movement that
says, look, we're out here.
We're not alone.
And then we can build a movement
that can make change happen.
>> I want to apologize
to my children.
Because of my
depression, because
of being without
shelter sometimes,
I abandoned them for
months at a time.
I wouldn't call.
I wouldn't be in contact.
They wouldn't know what
was going on with me.
I'm so blessed that their
stepmother even called me
one day and said, hey,
we have space for you.
How about you come
out to California?
It's a miracle to be in a space
where I can come and coparent
with my children and that all
three parents in the household
can get along and agree to
do our best for our children.
I've been away from my
children for 10 years.
The suffering that
they've been through--
I have to have complete
compassion for that.
And it's going to
take time for us
to build up a certain
level of trust.
>> She's a very different
type of person but different
in a good way.
When she's been going
through this process,
she's been away from
technology and everything
else that other people
have been around.
I think it gave her time to
find herself and figure out
who she really is.
>> Miles did come to me and ask,
Mom, what is it that you do?
And I said, honey,
I help people heal.
I help people get better.
>> The fact that I falsely
accused my father of molesting
me and the fact that he was able
to forgive me and still have
love for me--
it's just incredible to me.
I spent a lot of time
screaming, and punching things,
and just letting out
pent-up emotions-- crying--
the whole spectrum.
And the more that I would do
that, the less intense those
voices were becoming.
I just really had
to let it all out
and not judge myself for it.
If my mom were here right
now, she would be so happy.
The garden was something
that was her focus.
I mean, when she passed away,
our family was in shambles.
And if she's somewhere
right now, she's smiling.
>> While following Adam
and Ekhaya's stories,
I often thought of the
transformational process that
takes place in indigenous
and shamanic cultures.
And I wondered, what if
a mental health crisis
was viewed as a potential
growth experience instead
of a disease with no cure?
What if everyone was
supported and guided
to seek meaning and
purpose in their suffering?
If we took more time to be with
and listen to those considered
to be mentally
ill, we might find
there's a relationship
between crazy and wise.
[ACOUSTIC BEAT]
>> [RAP-SINGING] I pretended
to invent this moment
in attendance, forgot yet
again, ascension, remembrance.
Remember to forget
the graces of not yet.
I agree to see what I agree
to be my moment of attention,
free of what you mention,
to be my deficit,
won't pay you attention.
You won't make sense of it--
that I may give to you.
You take one
[INAUDIBLE] of it, what
it is you hear, see, or
feel-- a reminder of who
or what you're view to be real.
How do you feel?
Don't pay me your attention.
I'll do you the same.
Appreciate the fires,
individual flames,
making sparks within the
dark from residual gain.
Make the fire grow
higher in original names.
I am me.
You are, too.
I am you, who is who?
I am we.
I am free.
And--
[RAPPING] Actually,
ADD is what you may be,
and I faithfully read the
DSM-V, and it's been telling me
your sight's unfit
to see, so I'll
get paid to-- yes,
paid to oversee.
Your baby test rat,
medicated slavery.
The only escape
now is to obey me.
So look, watch me pull
this rabbit from this hat.
Look away and look back.
Not there?
Imagine that.
And we take notice, one-hour
segments of your deepest,
darkest secrets.
On file, we will keep it.
You'll be shaking cold leafless
in a permanent mental winter,
where we'll leave this.
>> [SINGING IN UNISON] I could
have a problem if a problem is
a problem to me.
This less than perfect life
is exactly what I need.
And I could have a problem if
a problem was a problem to me.
This less than perfect life
is exactly what I need.
I could have a problem if a
problem was a problem to me.
This less than perfect life
is exactly what I need.
[SOFT INSTRUMENTAL MUSIC]